Could a monkey sitting at a keyboard
punching keys at random eventually type
out the works of Shakespeare?
This is a famous thought experiment
called the infinite monkey thought
experiment. You've probably heard some
version of it before.
>> It was the best of times. It was the
blurst of times. YOU STUPID MONKEY.
>> Uh rose by any other name. Yeah, that
that works. All right. All right.
>> It's even been tested in real life with
real monkeys. In 2002, a team of
students took six Salawi crested macaks
at the Paintton Zoo in the UK and gave
them a keyboard and computer. After
nearly 2 months, this is the masterpiece
they produced.
It mostly consists of the letter S along
with a few others like Q and G. Not even
a single word of English was produced.
One of the monkeys started hitting the
keyboard with a rock and the others used
the computer as a toilet. Some of the
monkeys became fixated with certain
letters, pressing them multiple times in
a row. Their work has been published as
a book.
It's obvious why this experiment didn't
work, but it does make us think about
the assumptions that go into the
infinite monkey thought experiment.
Monkeys are just a fun way to think
about randomness. It's really asking, is
it possible for a random process to type
all the works of Shakespeare? It sounds
far-fetched. Surely pure randomness
can't account for something that took
genius to create. But if you stop and
think about it, every key has some
chance of being pressed. So every word
has some chance of being written. And so
does every sequence of two words and
three words and four words and so on.
Maybe it really is possible. And why
just stop at Shakespeare? Could this
monkey be used to write out new works of
literature or new scientific ideas that
we haven't even discovered yet? In this
video, we're going to do the math and
answer once and for all. Could a monkey
sitting at a keyboard punching keys at
random eventually type out Shakespeare?
So, we start by assuming our monkey is
pressing keys at random. The probability
of pressing any key is the same for any
other key. Let's restrict ourselves to
the 26 letters of the English alphabet
and the 10 digits. We'll also include
some grammatical symbols like comma,
period, question mark, and so on. We'll
also let space be its own symbol for a
grand total of 44 keys. The probability
of pressing any key is the same for any
other key. For example, the likelihood
that M gets pressed is the same of that
of J. Since we have 44 keys, each key
has a 1 in 44 probability of being
pressed. Next, we assume each key
pressed does not depend on what keys
came before it. This is called
independence. So, if the monkey types a
sequence of characters, the probability
of getting that exact sequence is just
the probability of each step multiplied
together. Any Shakespeare play is a
finite sequence of independent key
presses. So, what's the probability of
the monkey typing the fivelet sequence
hello? Well, each letter has a 1 in 44
chance of being pressed. So, the total
probability is 1 over 44 multiplied 5
times or 1 over 44 to the power of 5.
That's about a 1 in a 165 million
chance. In other words, the monkey would
on average need around 165 million tries
just to get hello once. To get a feel
for how unlikely that is, imagine
randomly dropping a pin on the entire
continent of Australia and having it
land right on the Sydney Opera House.
So, how long would we have to wait on
average before the monkey typed hello?
To get one estimate, if the monkey were
typing at a speed of one letters, pretty
reasonable for a monkey, I think, it
would take him over 26 years. That's a
pretty long time just for the word
hello. What about for the whole play of
Hamlet?
The probability of typing a sequence of
n characters is 1 over 44 to the power
of n. For a short sentence which has
around 50 characters, this would take
around 10 to the power of 76 years.
That's a 1 followed by 76 zeros. For
context, the current age of the universe
is 13.8 billion years or 1.38 * 10 ^ of
10. So you could replay the entire
history of the universe again and again
and again and again and again and you'd
still be nowhere near.
For a paragraph which has around 1,000
characters, it would take about 10 to
the power of 1,638
years. Again, for context, the estimated
heat death of the universe, where
everything dies and all that's left is a
dark cold void, is estimated to happen
at around 10 to the power of 100 years.
So the universe could die over and over
and over and over and over and over and
over and over and our poor monkey still
wouldn't even be close.
So for the whole play of Hamlet, which
according to Wikipedia has around
200,000 characters, it would take around
10 to the power of 328,688
years.
Here's
where I've reached my limit as a science
communicator because I have no idea how
to convey just how big this number
actually is. I was originally going to
say the universe would have to die
trillions and trillions of times before
there was even a tiny chance of typing
out Hamlet, but even trillions of
trillions of heat deaths would only be
around 10 to the power of 124 years. So,
it really doesn't do it justice. If
you've got any ideas about how to convey
the massive scale of this number, help
us all out and leave it in a comment.
But anyway, it's a long, long time. So,
to answer the question, could a monkey
sitting at a keyboard punching keys at
random eventually type out Shakespeare
with just a single monkey? The answer is
basically no. But maybe the problem is
that we just don't have enough monkeys.
Imagine if instead of a single monkey,
we had one monkey for each atom in the
universe. About 10 to the power of 80
monkeys. If the monkeys have until the
estimated heat death of the universe to
type out Hamlet, could they do it?
Before we get into the answer, what
makes this thought experiment so fun is
that we get to think about huge numbers
and cosmic time scales like the heat
death of the universe. But imagine
actually being one of the people who get
to explore the universe for real. You
might have heard about the Arteimus 2
mission, but did you know its crew
traveled farther from Earth than any
humans before, breaking the 56-year
record held by Apollo 13? Crew members
awoke to a recorded message from late
Apollo 13 commander Jim Lovel, who said,
"Welcome to my old neighborhood. I've
been keeping up with the Artemis 2
mission on Ground News, their website
and app designed by a former NASA
engineer on a mission to give readers an
easy, datadriven, objective way to read
the news. What makes Ground News
different is that it's designed to help
you pull back the curtain on media bias.
They've even been endorsed by the Noble
Peace Center for their impact on media
literacy, which is why I'm excited to
have them sponsor today's video. For
example, with the Aremis mission, over
500 sources covered this story. And if I
scroll down to see how it's being
covered, left-leaning outlets framed it
as an emotional, human- centered
milestone, highlighting crew diversity
and using words like daring and
sometimes lonely to describe it, while
right-leaning outlets described it as
being a triumph of national leadership,
using words like records shattering and
triumphant, emphasizing achievement and
prestige. It's interesting how the same
event can be reported in such different
ways depending on who's telling the
story. That's why I use ground news. I
want an unbiased picture that focuses on
the facts. And for every story, I can
get a visual breakdown of the sources,
political bias, reliability, and
ownership. All backed by ratings from
three independent news monitoring
organization. I can even filter by
geographic location and factuality to
dig deeper into what I want to see. One
of my favorite features is their blind
spot feed, which shows you stories under
reportported by either side of the
political spectrum. For example, if you
lean right, you might have missed this
story about how the Arteimus spacecraft
was having toilet troubles just hours
before the launch. As a fellow critical
thinker, you know that we can't just
rely on one piece of data or a single
perspective to get the full picture.
Ground news allows you to analyze news
in a scientific way by comparing
sources, checking for bias, and building
a well-rounded understanding of the most
important things going on in the world
today. I've partnered with Ground News
to get you 40% off their Vantage
subscription, which is the subscription
I'm on, to get unlimited access to all
of their amazing features. Access this
discount through the link
ground.news/upandom, news/upandadom
which you can also find in the
description of this video or scan the QR
code on screen. Support an independent
news platform working to make the media
landscape more transparent. Okay, back
to the video. If we had one monkey for
every atom in the universe, punching
keys at random, could they produce
Hamlet before the heat death of the
universe?
To have a reasonable shot at producing
Hamlet, they would need to type around
10 the power of 328,695
letters. But at one letter pers, they
would only be able to produce around 10
the power of 187 letters, a number
hundreds of thousands of orders of
magnitude smaller. They would barely
make a dent.
So, in any realistic amount of time,
monkeys will not be writing up
Shakespeare anytime soon. But this is up
in Adam. So, we're going to stretch the
math to its limits and ask a more
interesting question. What if time never
ends? We'll see that once time becomes
infinite, probability behaves very
differently. You've probably guessed
that if we allow for infinite time, the
monkey riding hamlet is bound to happen.
Sure, the probability is tiny, but we
have forever. But here's the real
question mathematicians ask. Does the
monkey produce a finite amount of
hamlets, or does it produce an infinite
amount of hamlets?
On one hand, you might think it only
happens a limited number of times. After
all, typing Hamlet is unbelievably
unlikely.
But on the other hand, you have forever.
So maybe it just keeps happening over
and over and over. To get a handle on
this, let's play a strange game of
darts.
Imagine you're throwing darts at a
dartboard. The rules are that after each
throw, the dart board gets cut in half.
It starts with an area of 1 m squared.
Then after the first throw, it's half a
meter squared. then a quarter of a meter
squared, then an eighth of a meter
squared, and so on.
Now, another strange twist. You're not
very good at dots because, well, you're
a monkey. In fact, you just throw the
dots randomly in the direction of the
dart board. So, the probability that you
hit the board is equal to the board's
area. So, if it's half a meter squared,
you have a half chance of hitting it. If
it's a/4 of a me squared, you have a
quarter of a chance of hitting it. If
it's an eighth of a meter squared, you
have an eighth of a chance of hitting it
and so on.
After infinitely many throws, how many
times will you hit the board?
In this case, the probabilities shrink
so quickly that they add up to a finite
number.
A beautiful result in mathematics called
the first Burell Cantelli lema says that
when the sum of probabilities is finite
like this or converges, something
interesting happens with probability
one, you will only hit the board a
finite number of times.
Now let's play again and change one
thing. Instead of the dart board getting
cut in half each time, it gets cut into
slices according to this new pattern.
After the first throw, it has half its
original area. After the second throw,
it has a third of its original area.
After the third throw, it has a quarter
of its original area. After the fourth
throw, it has a fifth of its original
area, and so on.
Again, the probability of hitting the
board is equal to the board's area. So,
how do the probabilities stack up this
time?
Hang on. They keep getting bigger and
bigger, piling on forever. The sum keeps
growing to infinity or diverges.
So after infinitely many throws, how
many times do you hit the board? This is
where the second burill can lemma comes
in. It says that with independent
events, if the sum of the probabilities
diverges like this, then with
probability one, you'll hit the board
infinitely many times.
So, here's the important idea. If the
probabilities shrink fast enough that
their sum stays finite, you'll hit the
board a finite number of times. But if
they don't shrink fast enough, so the
sum keeps growing forever, then you'll
hit the board infinitely many times. So,
what does this have to do with whether
our monkey will type out Hamlet? You can
think of a random sequence of 200,000
characters as a dart throw. And the
probability that the letters will be
Hamlet equivalent to the probability
that the dart will hit the board. The
probability that the monkey will type
out Hamlet is 1 over 44 to the power of
200,000.
After infinitely many tries, how many
times will the monkey type out Hamlet?
Well, does the sum of the probabilities
add up to a finite number or keep
getting bigger till infinity?
The probabilities of producing Hamlet
are tiny. But we can see that as we add
them up, they're not slowing down. This
is an even simpler case than our
dartboard game because the probabilities
don't even get smaller. If you sum up
any constant number, no matter how
small, it will eventually add to
infinity. Which means given infinite
time, our monkey types out Hamlet
infinitely many times. Within the entire
lifetime of the universe, our monkey
still probably wouldn't manage to write
Hamlet even once. But given infinite
time, it would almost surely write it
infinitely many times.
But what's special about Hamlet? Hamlet
is just one particular sequence of
characters. The same reasoning works for
any sequence of characters. a poem, a
novel, a scientific breakthrough, a book
that hasn't been written yet. The monkey
will eventually write every possible
book humanity has ever written, and
every possible book humanity has never
written. Not once, not twice, infinitely
many times. Hello. So, if you've been
wondering where I've been for the past
year or so, I had these two. So, this is
a
Isaac. I had a pretty rough pregnancy,
so I took off basically the whole
pregnancy. Now, these guys are 4 months
old, and I'm back to making videos
part-time. I have no idea what this year
is going to look like. Um, but you
should be seeing more of me than you did
last year. So, yeah, just in case you're
wondering where I've been, see you in
the next episode. Bye.